Any use of trade, product, or firm names in this document is for 
descriptive purposes only and does not imply endorsement by the 
U.S. Government.

See release.txt packaged with FEQ 8.92 and FEQ 9.98 for notes on 
earlier versions. Also available at 
http://il.water.usgs.gov/proj/feq/software/release_feq892.txt and
http://il.water.usgs.gov/proj/feq/software/release_feq998.txt


-----------------------------------
Descriptions of changes made to FEQ
-----------------------------------
(Descriptions of changes made to FEQUTL follows at end.)

Version 10.0

22 April 2003

--Options are available in the Run-Control Block to control the Newton
solution. This is targeted at the problem of having only a few variables 
fail to meet convergence before the time step is automatically reduced 
to the to the minimum step size set by the user.  The options are 
referred to as High IQ Newton Solution (HI_IQ_NS). 

The general idea is to identify the internal variable that last appeared 
in the iteration log at convergence failure.  This variable is the added 
to an action list: a list of variables for which the user can take 
special action.  The user can choose to not use the full correction for 
that variable in the Newton solution.  Instead, a partial correction 
can be specified with the partial correction being determined by other 
options given in the Run-Control Block. In this way FEQ can respond to 
some computational problems on the fly rather than requiring a manual 
change of the input file set up conditions and the "time-step too small" 
message frequency can be reduced.  

Note:  There are two variables at each node in the model: flow and 
depth/elevation. Even though only one variable is not converged both 
variables are added to the action list by placing the internal id number 
for the flow variable on the list.  The id number for the flow variable 
is always odd and the depth/elevation variable is the next following 
even number.  This is needed because a frequent problem near full 
submergence for a two-dimensional structure is that the depth variable 
may oscillate within its convergence tolerance but the flow variable 
will be outside its tolerance.  Thus we link the two variables at a 
node: both must be converged before they can be removed from the action 
list but only one being out of convergence forces them to be placed 
on the action list.  The iteration log may show an even number as 
the internal id number for the out of convergence variable but the 
message about adding the variable to the list will give an odd number 
that is one less than the out-of-convergence variable. 

The options in the Run-Control Block are:

HI_IQ_NS=NO    This is the default value for this option.  

HI_IQ_NS=LEV1    At level 1, variables stay on the list until the entire 
                 model converges. At each additional reduced time step 
                 attempted in seeking convergence, the Newton correction 
                 is reduced by the factor given in HI_IQ_NS_DWN unless 
                 the correction is at or belowHI_IQ_NS_LMT.  When 
                 convergence is achieved for the whole system, the 
                 correction fraction is increased by HI_IQ_NS_UP until 
                 the  fraction becomes 1.0 and the variable is removed 
                 from the action list.

HI_IQ_NS=LEV2    At level 2, variables stay on the list only until that  
                 variable is converged.  Thus even if system-wide 
                 convergence is not achieved, a variable on the list 
                 will be removed if it has converged.  Also on system 
                 convergence, all variables are removed from the list 
                 and the correction fraction returns to 1.0.


HI_IQ_NS_NUMGT  The count of variables outside of the convergence 
                tolerance must be less than or equal to this number 
                before the IH_IQ_NS levels become active.  The 
                corrections used in the HI_IQ_NS process make sense 
                only if the number of variables areout of tolerances 
                is small.  The ability to converge is sensitive to 
                this variable, and the user may need to try a number 
                great or smaller than 7. Note that this count is for
                variables out of convergence and does not include any 
                that are in convergence.  However, as noted above 
                both variables at a node will be added to the list 
                even though only one is out of convergence. 

HI_IQ_NS_DWN    is the reduction factor for the Newton correction.  
                Default is 0.5

HI_IQ_NS_UP     is the factor to increase the Newton correction up to 
                the limit of 1.0. Default is sqrt(1.0/HI_IQ_NS_DWN).  
                If the value for HI_IQ_NS_UP is < 0, then the value is
                redefined as (1.0/HI_IQ_NS_DWN)^(1.0/abs(HI_IQ_NS_UP)).  
                For example we get, assumming, HI_IQ_NS_DWN= 0.75,

                 Input value of        Internal value of
                 HI_IQ_NS_UP           HI_IQ_NS_UP
                 --------------        ------------------
                    1.25                 1.25
                    -1.0                 1.3333
                    -2.0                 1.1547
                    -3.0                 1.1006
               This parameter is only used for LEV1.  In LEV2 a 
               variable is removed from the action list as soon as 
               that variable satisfies the convergence tolerances.             
                    
HI_IQ_NS_LMT   is the lower limit for the fraction defining the 
               partial-Newton correction. Default is 0.1.  Users may 
               find values as low as 0.01 useful in some cases.  

Here is an example that was tested on a large model with more than 
13,000 variables:

HI_IQ_NS=LEV2
HI_IQ_NS_NUMGT= 7
HI_IQ_NS_DWN = 0.5
HI_IQ_NS_UP = -1.0
HI_IQ_NS_LMT = 0.01

In this example, a small value for HI_IQ_NS_LMT was required to get 
convergence at at one point.

In this example, the default values for time-step increase and 
decrease were also modified because the default values moved the time 
step too rapidly.  The values that worked with HI_IQ_NS=LEV2 were:

AUTO=0.67
MAXDT=1800. MINDT= 1.0
LFAC= 0.8  HFAC= 1.25

--The format of the iteration log has been changed slightly.  A new 
column listing the internal variable number has been added.  This 
makes it possible to connect a given branch/node or free node with an 
internal variable number. The node column now has a one-character 
column that will contain q for flow or y for depth instead of using 
a sign to indicate the difference.  This may prove helpful in 
deciding what High IQ Newton Solution option to try. 

--Additional output has been added.  Brief messages are given in the 
master-output file when variables are placed on or removed from the 
action list.  Also the runtime is now given when the run fails due to 
excessive reduction of the time step.

Refined upgrades of cross-section table types 20-25 are now available.
The new internal cross-section function tables are numbered 30-35. 
These include the derivatives to render conveyance, alpha, beta, Ma, 
and Mq, to be at least piecewise cubic with continuous first 
derivatives everywhere and continuous second derivatives at all but 
some breakpoints.  There is also an extension of type 13, type 43, 
that also ensures at least piecewise cubic variation with continuous 
first derivatives everywhere and continuous second derivatives except 
near regions that had to be adjusted.  This option may prove useful 
for situations where the Newton solution fails to converge because of
the simple approximations for the required derivatives that were not 
continuous at the breakpoints for conveyance, alpha, beta, Ma, Mq in 
the cross-section function tables and for function table types 2, 13, 
and 14.

These tables have been added to yield functional representations that 
are smoother in the sense of having continuity of the first derivative 
and sometimes the second derivative at the tabulated depth values 
(breakpoints).  It may be that some of the computational problems in an 
unsteady-flow model originate at the discontinuities in first 
derivative at breakpoints.  A review of the convergence theorems for 
Newton's method shows that they all depend on continuity of the first 
derivative near the root.  If one of the roots is close to a 
breakpoint, a likely occurrence with a few thousand cross-section 
function tables and each table with 30-100 breakpoints, then the model 
may have convergence difficulty.

The increased order of interpolation may yield more accurate values 
of conveyance, for example, but it is not clear that the change is of 
any significance.  None of the effort in including increased smoothness 
in approximations was motivated by increased accuracy.  It was done to 
increase the robustness of the computations.

To convert all cross-section function tables to types 30-35 for an 
unsteady-flow model, add UPGRADE_XSEC_TAB=YES to the Run-Control 
Block.  All cross-section function tables found by FEQ will be 
automatically converted to the corresponding new type.  If you use
UPGRADE_XSEC_TAB=YESO, then FEQ will dump the new tables as they 
are created.  This results in a large output file.  In any case, 
FEQ currently runs some checks for problem areas on the new tables 
and outputs what it has found.  

An external form for type 43 has not yet been defined.  Thus to get 
this type use TY13_TO_TY43=YES in the Run-Control Block.  All type 
13 tables found will be converted to type 43. Tests will be run on 
each table and a summary printed.  Some tables may need to be 
recomputed to reduce problems.  Again if TY13_TO_TY43=YESO is used, 
a complete dump of the table will be done.  This results in quite 
large output files but can be used for testing and checking. 

It should be apparent that both the storage-space required and the 
lookup-time required for these tables is appreciably larger than for 
their simpler relatives.  Thus not all models will benefit with 
respect to computation time by using these options.  The user can try 
these options and compare with the standard defaults option.  Results 
so far indicate that for:

1. For large models, those with more than 500 branches, the greater 
smoothness in derivatives provided by these options provides somewhat 
greater robustness, that is, there seem to be fewer computational 
failures, and there is a reduced run time because the extra time in 
lookup is repaid in there being fewer iterations required to 
convergence. It is also possible to use the extrapolation options in 
the Run-Control block and still maintain good performance.  This can 
reduce runtimes by as much as 25 percent alone.  Trying to use that 
large an extrapolation without the smoother tables either fails to 
converge or the iteration count rises to the point that it takes 
longer to compute. However, it is not uniformly true that the 
smoother tables produce better convergence.  Therefore, the standard 
tables options is always available.


2. In rough comparisons so far, the results for extreme values are 
essentially the same if both approaches result in a completed 
computation.  The maximum elevation differ on the order of a few 
thousandths of a foot and the flows may vary in the third or fourth 
digit, which is the same order of variation that occurs when using 
executable code compiled by different compilers.  It should be noted 
that may large models make heavy use of automatic argument selection 
for type 13 tables whereever FEQUTL supports it.  This is important 
because this means that all  2-D tables of type 13, save those from 
CULVERT, are computed so that linear interpolation in the table would 
yield errors at most of 1 to 2 per cent.  If manual spacing for 
arguments is used, then the differences may be much larger because 
the piecewise cubic fit and the piecewise linear fit will differ by 
much larger amounts, especially at small heads.  It is almost always
true that manual placement of the upstream heads results in far too 
many large heads and far too few small heads.  

--It was found that FEQ can fail to converge before the minimum time 
step is reached because of a bug in the code used to synchronize time 
when the maximum time step is attained. Some years ago users found it 
disconcerting that the time would be at some odd interval even though 
the maximum time step was being used for long periods.  To avoid this, 
FEQ tests for the need to synchronize the time with the max time step,  
that is, bring the time so that its value would result in  values in 
agreement with the maximum time step.  For example if the maximum time 
step were 1800 seconds, then the computation points should be shifted 
so that there are results at every hour and every half hour.  

Because the default factors for decreasing and increasing the time 
step were 0.5 and 2.0 respectively, the roundoff error in the process 
of changing the time step was small, especially since, FEQ maintins 
the time step in double precision.  However, when using the HI_IQ_NS 
options, the reduction factor was changed from 0.5 to 0.7 which 
introduced more potential roundoff error.  After many runs with no 
problems the synchronizing algorithm computed a time step close to 
zero but larger than the tolerance allowed.  Thus FEQ found that the 
time step was less than the minimum allowed time step and stopped.  
In fact, the time step was being reset to the maximum when this 
occurred and the computation for the time step needed to synchronize 
was just roundoff error.   

Therefore, this bug has been fixed by requiring that the 
synchronizing time step must be at least as large as the minimum time 
step before it is done.  In addition a new message is written to the 
master output file when a synchronizing time step is computed.  This 
message is needed because the output can become a bit confusing 
because the time step is first set to the maximum and then it is 
changed to something smaller.  

--FEQ now has the ability use a time-series table that gives the 
maximum time step as a function of time.  This can prove useful when 
models require an extensive warmup period before the computations for 
the period of interest begin.  It is also useful for those cases when 
long periods of low flow must be simulated in order to drain water 
stored on the flood plain behind levees or behind dams when modeling 
a sequence of storms.   This table is of type 7 and gives the time 
and the maximum time step at that time. Please note that the time and 
the time step given in the master output file give the time at the 
end of the time step reported.  The max-time step table needs the 
time at the beginning of the time step.

To make this task easier, FEQ, also has the ability to output a file 
containing the record of all time steps with the time at the start 
of the time step given.  This file can then be used as a basis for
creating the max-time step table.   To do this make a run with a 
fixed time step and request that this file be created.  Then edit 
the file to create a valid sequence of maximum time steps and 
rename the file.  Then add the file to the list of files read in the 
Functions-Table block. 

The two new Run-Control Block options are:


MAKE_DT_TAB= /dt_tab  This requests that the time-step and time 
                      information be written to a file named dt_tab 
                      and appearing in the global-home name directory 
                      if any exists. If none exists the file should 
                      appear in the current directory.  Note that 
                      this file DOES not contain a vaild type 7 table.  
                      You must use the contents of this file to create 
                      such a table.



USE_MAXDT_TAB= max_dt_2002  This requests using a table with a table 
                            id of max_dt_2002 to define the maximum 
                            time step.  The maximum time step is reset
                            before the computations are started.  

Again it takes some practice to make good use of this feature.  
However, by carefully editing the time-step pattern from a successful 
run, reductions in runtime on the order of 25 percent can be attained.  
However, again, at least with large models, computational failure 
can also be created. 

--Changed meaning of the flow-factor adjustment table in the side-weir 
instruction, code=14, when it appears with a crest level adjustment.  
When both optional tables are present, FEQ does the following:

1. Computes the flow at the head at current crest level = Q1
2. Computes the flow at the head at original fixed crest level = Q2 
3. Finds the current flow factor, fac, from the flow-factor table. 
4. Computes the flow as:  
   
     Q = fac*Q1 + (1 - fac)*Q2

This approximates the combination of flow over the portion of the 
flow surface that is at its original level and the flow through the 
portion of the flow surface that is at its new level.  This 
computation assumes the crest is approx horizontal and that the flow 
interaction between the two flows is small.     The factor is estimated
by the ratio of the length of weir that is being shifted by erosion of 
the surface to the total overflow weir segment.   Previously, this 
time series table consisted of factor values determined by the user.  
See the side weir description in 
http://il.water.usgs.gov/proj/feq/software/release_feq998.txt
Version 9.69.

Version 10.01

17 May 2003

--Increased the title block to 201 lines. 

--Skip blank lines at the start of the master-input file.  

Version 10.02

19 June 2003

--Fixed bug in reporting the interpolation for high-water marks.  The 
stationing factor was not applied to the output when interpolating.  
Thus small errors on the order of a few tenths of foot were made.  
This is relevant only for users who utilize a file hwmark.loc 
containing high-water marks for their model.

--Added code to the GENSCN output to compensate for a bug in GENSCN.  
GENSCN is unable to plot results at a free node when that node is not 
a reservoir node.  The problem appears to be that GENSCN is seeking a 
non-zero index to a function table for every node.  However, no such 
table is needed nor does one exist for a free node on a dummy branch 
or for the inflow to a level-pool reservoir.  However, GENSCN will 
plot the results if a valid ftab index is given for these free nodes.  
Therefore, this code places a valid ftab index for all free nodes not 
having any such table.  If under some circumstances, GENSCN should
try to lookup some values in this function table, we will have 
problems.  So far this has not happened.  


Version 10.03

21 July 2003
                                                        
--Fixed bug in code 4 type 6 output.  This feature was coded for one 
particular model needed by the FEQ developer.

Version 10.04

1 December 2003  

--Changed the console output for FEQ to try to get the same behavior in 
MSW and Linux. The new output prints a horizontal series of periods 
(dots) for each consecutive time step that is unchanged from the 
earlier one.  A new line of information is printed whenever the time 
step changes.  In GNU/Linux where the whole set of dots is printed at 
one time.

Version 10.05

22 April 2004

--Changed computation of the minimum time step to exclude time steps
that were set in order to sychronize time with even increments of
one hour.  Sometimes that adjustment produces a time step that is
small and the minimum time step does not reflect the level of 
computational difficulty found during the run.


Version 10.06

6 May 2004

--Changed format for Time of max Z, Time of max Q, and Time of min Q
to include leading zeros in the year, month, and day fields.


Version 10.10

22 May 2004

--Changed format of debug output of the equations in the Network Matrix
to allow 5 digits for the variable number.  Needed to do debugging on 
a model with more than 14,000 equations. 

--Corrected several errors in the handling of eddy losses (KA and KD 
being the parameters) in branches:

1. In some cases of strong reverse flow and larger values of either KA
or KD an error in the partial derivatives of the eddy-loss term caused
either slow convergence or failure of convergence.  This did not occur
if all the flows in a branch were positive.  This might be part of the 
reason for slow convergence observed in some cases for branches subject
tidal influence.  

2. In some cases of reverse flow, another error in handling the 
eddy losses could cause the eddy losses to be ignored when they 
should have been included.  This probably only took place when 
there was reverse flow and the time step converged in only one
iteration.  This would normally be during periods of essentially 
constant flow everywhere or at most slowly varying flow.  Again 
the potential effect is very small was limited to reverse flows 
in a branch.  A very large reverse flow might have caused the 
model to fail to converge.

--Corrected an error in the setting of a partial derivative in tables
of type 14 when the flow moved from zero to non-zero.  This could cause
convergence failures when a type 14 table was used for a location where 
the flow was zero most of the time and became non-zero only during major 
floods.  

--Added additional code to lookup of tables of type 14 to catch 
inconsistent heads and flows.  Detailed output added to FEQ 
to diagnose severe problems for flow in a dry bridge, that is, 
a bridge through a road fill in the flood plain that has zero
flow except during floods.   The flows at such a bridge
are subject to roundoff and convergence tolerance noise
when the flows are negligible.  Thus FEQ now forces the 
flow to be zero in the lookup process if the head 
physically upstream of the claimed non-zero flow is
less than zero.  Obviously the flow is wrong and is 
the result of computational round-off error.  This noise causes
the Newton iterations to sometimes fail repeatedly until 
the time-step limit is reached.  

--Added output of a summary of the number of equations produces
by each of the codes used in the Network Matrix Control input.
This may help the user find patterns in how many equations come from
various sources.  The summary also indicates which of the equations
are linear and which are non-linear.   

Version 10.11

29 June 2004

--Added code so that FEQ can determine the operating system under 
which it is running and then make sure that the directory name
and subname divider is consistent with the OS in file names. 
Thus it is possible to use either the backslash or the forward
slash in a file name or a mix of the two!  Lahey Fortran allows
this but some other compilers may not do so.  Consequently,
the FEQ now makes the conversion so that an input can be 
transfered between the two operating systems and not require changes 
in the file names.  

--Added home-name addition to the macro file name.  So far the 
macro file name has not been used except in limited test cases.  

Version 10.12

16 July  2004

--The TAB-defined head datum for code 5 type 6 and code 14 can be 
modified by specifying an increment/decrement.  

This feature is quite useful when there are many flow tables with head 
datum defined by looking it up from the table.  For this case, in the 
instruction in FEQ only the special string TAB or tab appears. 
Previously, to change the datum it is necessary to find the datum from 
that table, apply the shift and then change the TAB or tab to the 
correct numerical value.  This new feature makes it possible to add 
the change to TAB or tab with no blanks, and FEQ then computes the 
shift.  For example, to shift the flow table datum up by 0.25 use:

TAB+0.25

A downward shift is then: 

TAB-0.25

The user is of course, as always, responsible to make sure that such a 
shift makes sense.  FEQ does no checking on the size of the shift.  

Version  10.15

25 August 2004

--Expanded the file-name length for all but command-line arguments to 
be 128 characters.  The home name can be up to 128 characters as well 
so I suppose one could end up with a 256-character file name.  The 
user should be aware of the limitation of their operating system if 
utilizing a very long file name.

This change required many adjustments in many locations in order that
the increased lengths could be read from the input files and would be 
written to the output files.  Tests using file names with lengths 
varying from 80+ to about 124 characters have been run for:

   Special Output file name
   Output file name for time-series
   GENSCN output base file name
   Function Tables Block with a home name of about 90 characters
   Function Tables Block with a file name of about 90 characters.

They all were read and output properly. Two existing models without 
longer file names also ran properly.  One of them used HECDSS and 
the other did not. 

Version  10.16

20 October 2004

--Increased node limit in GENSCN to 20,000 nodes.  Lahey Fortran
compilers appear to support the resulting record lengths.  

Version  10.17

5 November 2004

--Increased special output count to 250.  

Version 10.20

13 January 2005

--Point time-series files (PTSF's) are now read and written as 
direct-access unformatted.  This change allows these files to move 
among various operating systems and compiled executables.  This has
been tested on five different compilers (two under Linux and three 
under MS Windows).  PTSF's created with earlier versions of FEQ must 
be converted using the PTSFUTL utility or the models that generated 
the PTSFUTL must be rerun with FEQ version 10.20 or later.

--Diffuse time-series files (DTSF's) are now read by FEQ as 
direct-access unformatted.  This change was made to allow these files
to move among the various operating systems and compilers, similarly 
to the PSTF's.  Old files must be converted using the version of 
TSFUTL included in the FEQ 10.60 release package.  HSPF 12.0 allows 
a direct output to the new unformatted DTSF using the PLTGEN routine. 

--In the process of making the changes for DTSF handling, it 
was noticed that the variables used in computing the average
runoff in an FEQ time step were declared single precision. 
All of the variables leading up to that point were double
precision.  This appeared to be a long term oversight. 
Therefore, the declarations for these variables have been 
changed to be double precision also.  

Testing on an old version of a DuPage County Trib4 model,
showed that the changes in flows, if any, were in the  
last one or two digits printed.  The time of extreme 
values sometimes shifted by an FEQ time step or two as
well.  All of these changes appear to be inconsequential. 

--The response of FEQ to a selector variable with an unknown 
value has been changed from generating an error message and
stopping to setting the unknown value to false and continuing
after issuing a warning message.  This may make using selector 
variables more natural.  Currently every variable in the input 
must have a value explicitly set.  These requires setting
an ever growing number of selector variables to false
and to changing existing scenario blocks when new 
scenarios are added.  With this change only the selector 
variables that have to be true need be set in any scenario-
defining block.  All others not set will be given the value 
of false when they are found. 

Version 10.21

14 February 2005

--Changed detection tolerance for side-weirs with non-zero flow
in the initial conditions.  This was designed to permit these
flow points to become active.  Ideally the flow over any side weir 
should be zero in the initial conditions but that is not always 
possible.  

--The special output block will now write a descriptor file, 
with a standard extension of *.spi, to describe the special output
file itself to feqplot, the GUI result viewer for time series. 
This allows us to better control the working of feqplot and still 
leave the format of the special output file itself unchanged. 

Version 10.22

7 July 2005

--Changed output units for QUAD option in the Output Files Block
to use acre-feet when GRAV > 15.0 and 1,000 cubic meters otherwise. 

Version 10.23

2 August 2005

--Home name for output files was truncated to its actual length for 
output.

--Added the "top of stack" line when processing selector blocks in 
order to help find problems with matching IF with ELSE, ELSEIF, and 
ENDIF.  In some cases the output file is complete, especially if an 
ENDIF is missing, and gives no clue as to where the problem might be.  
The top of stack line will usually be the IF statement that has not 
been matched.  If there are multiple IF statements with the same 
selector variable, a common occurrence, it proves helpful to label 
each of these identical IF statements with a unique label given after
a single quote, for example,

IF Q1990    '1

ENDIF

IF Q1990    '2

ENDIF

Then if an ENDIF is missing, and FEQ finds the end of file 
searching for it, the error message will have the offending IF 
statement given with the error message and the unique label will 
allow finding that statement without an extensive and sometimes error 
prone search.  

Version 10.24

29 August 2005

--Add ability to set a selector variable outside of the SET SELECTORS 
block. This is done using the keyword: SET.  This feature was added to 
make the selection process easier to define.  

For examples:

IF Q1990
  SET lowflow = false
ELSEIF Q1995
  SET lowflow = false
ELSEIF Q2002
  SET lowflow = true
ELSE
  SET Lowflow = true
ENDIF

IF lowflow

  Select stuff that is only to be used with the smaller flood events
ELSE

  Select stuff that is only to be used with the larger flood events
ENDIF

A Selector variable may be defined or redefined by this process.  Do 
not use SET within a SET SELECTORS block.

Version 10.25

27 September 2005

--Corrected an error in time reporting when using a DTSF.  The 
reported time offset depended on the initial hour of each event.  If 
the starting hour was zero then the offset was zero.  Otherwise the 
offset would depend on the starting hour.  If the starting hour was 1, 
then then offset was 1 - 1/24.0 hours, which is slightly less than one 
hour.  Most DTSF's of which I am aware have events which start at hour 
1 or sometimes hour zero.  Thus the maximum offset in reported time is 
one hour or less.  

Version 10.30

30 September 2005

--Added support for creating a dual-source forced boundary condition 
using a new block of input.  This block of input creates a PTSF from 
two data sources given by the user.  The sources may be either a PTSF 
or a time-series table (TSTAB).  The purpose of dual sources is to 
make real-time forecasting using FEQ somewhat smoother.  An example 
block follows: 

DUAL SOURCE
  DEFINE forecast._doc_
    FILE= /forecast/sbrook05/flowhist/busse_flow.ptsf   TRAN_START=2005/09/01: 0.d0
    TABLE = busse_Q_frm_tab   
  END  forecast._doc_
END DUAL SOURCE

This block, if it appears, should be just before the 
INPUT-FILE-SPECIFICATION block.  The name following the DEFINE is the 
name of the file that will be created by FEQ.  The strange extension 
for this file requests that FEQ delete the file when it is closed 
(delete on close--doc).  The PTSF given in FILE contains the first 
source in this example.  The data in this PTSF is to be used until the 
date/time given in TRAN_START If a time point exists in the file, 
busse_flow.ptsf, at this time point, it will appear in forecast._doc_.  
The first time point from buss_Q_frm_tab will be the first one 
following the date/time given in TRAN_START.  If TRAN_START is not 
present, then the first source is used until its last time point.  Any 
combination of a PTSF and a TSTAB can be used.  The file created, 
forecast._doc_, is then referenced in the INPUT-FILE-SPECIFICATION 
block just like any other PTSF.  

--To better support dual-source creation, the internal storage pattern 
for time-series tables has been changed to full double precision.  In 
earlier versions, time-series tables of types 7, 8, and 9, only had an 
existence until input, at which time they were changed internally to 
types 2, 3, and 4.  This is no longer true.  There is a special 
internal representation for time-series tables that now represents 
long time spans accurately.  Extensive comparisons have been made 
between old and new versions on a small collection of models.  The 
effect is small with most changes being in the 4-th significant digit.  
These changes come about from at least three sources: 

1. The time value is now stored in double precision whereas in earlier
versions it was stored in single precision.   

2.  The values for the flow or elevation are now stored in double 
precision yielding a small change in trunctation error.  However, 
values returned from the table lookup are still given in single 
precision.  

3.  The above two effects can cause either a change in the number of 
iterations at one or more time steps or even a change in the number 
and size of the time steps.  This comes about because the computer is 
a "slave to precision".  A minute change can sometimes cause a change 
in number of iterations and this can potentially change one or more 
time step sizes.  

The effect in step 3 is the primary one and it reflects the inherent 
uncertainty in using an interative process to find a solution.  

--A new Run-Control-Block option has been added to enable forecasting 
with a DTSF present.  The standard behavior when a DTSF is present is 
to force the start time to match the start time of each event in turn.  
That was the original purpose of have a series of events placed into a 
DTSF.  To avoid this behavior, include the option, 

FRCST_WTH_DTSF= YES

in the Run Control Block.  

When this option is present, the start time is used to locate the 
event in the DTSF.  The event selected for simulation is the event 
that contains the start time.  Only one event will be run because 
only one event can contain the start time. This follows because 
events must be non-overlapping and in ascending order in a 
DTSF.  

--The GETIC and PUTIC files have been updated to be written and read 
using direct access statements.  This means that old forms of these 
files cannot be used with this version.  The files have been expanded 
to support additional control structures as well, so old files are 
obselete for that reason too.  Note that this version requires that 
all PTSF and DTSF files be in direct-access format also.  Any that are 
not in that format can be updated using a utility program for that 
purpose.  

--The total count of iterations to a given time step has been added 
to the output to enable comparing runs more closely for differences.  
If the total iterations differs then a possible source of any 
differences found is in the number of iterations.

Version 10.31

10 November 2005

--Changed formats used in processing heading-dependent input formats.
Some floating-point input fields had been read using list-directed 
input, that is, with no format given.  These have been changed to 
using f20.0 to allow more comprehensive error checking.  With the 
list-directed format option the following string, '.  662.0', could
have been read as zero by at least one compiler's executable of FEQ.  

Version 10.32

8 December 2005

--Changed processing of selected input fields to detect spaces interior 
to the field that result from a character falling outside the assigned 
columns in a heading-dependent input line.  Any spaces within a number
are invalid and will produce an error message.  There should be no 
spaces between a leading sign and the number to which it applies.

--Fixed bug in the option to automatically generate the master-output 
file name from the root of the master-input file name.  FEQ failed to 
add the .out extension to the root name from the master-input file 
name.  

--The last extension on the master-output file name is now applied to 
all output files so that they are uniquely named and not overwritten.  
This happens automatically so if you do not want this action, then no 
extension should be used on the master-output file name.  The 
extension from the master-output file is not placed at the end of the 
file name unless it has no extension.  If an extension is already in 
place, the added extension is place just before the final extension in 
the name.  This is done because some of the extensions are keyed to 
software that processes names based on the final extension.  The 
extension placed on the master-output file defines a sub-scenario so 
to speak, perhaps involving variations not included in the other 
components of the scenario, or perhaps it proves simpler to create 
variations of a scenario without defining a whole new subdirectory for 
the results.  

--Home-name processing has been changed.  The home name defined in the 
set-selectors block is now only used for file output.  This home name 
becomes the global home name for output.  All other HOME values will 
refer only to input of files with one exception.  The GETIC and PUTIC 
files are both treated as being in the directory given by the global 
home name for output.  GETIC refers to a file used for input of the 
initial conditions but it is given the output home name because the 
only way that file can be created is by output from a previous run of 
FEQ.  In that run it will be placed in the directory given by the home 
name defined in the set-selectors block.  It does not make sense to 
have to copy the file to some other location to use it for input on 
subsequent runs.  

Once set, the global home name for output cannot be changed by any 
other home-name input.  The home name given in the run-control block 
is the global home hame for input.  Each block of input to FEQ that 
contains files, will also have a local home name value that can be set 
by the user.  The rule for deciding which home name to use is simple: 
if the local home name is not given, then the global home name is 
used, otherwise, the local home name is used in that block.  

Version 10.33

6 March 2006

--Changes to home-names caused a problem with finding the special file, 
hwmark.loc.  Corrected home-name addition to add the global-home name
for output to hwmark.loc.

--The information file for the special-output file got two instances of 
the master-output file extension when only one should have been added. 

Version 10.34

17 March 2006

--Removed spaces from blank lines in the schematic script file.  These 
caused a problem with Autocad applications.

Version 10.35

28 March 2006

--Made final changes to GENSCN for direct-access file usage for both 
the TSD and the FTF file.  Users should also request that the 
new-format for the FEO file be used once GENSCN is updated.  This has 
been made the default.  Thus if you wish to retain the old format for 
the FEO file, then be sure to add NEW_GENSCN_FE0=NO in the Run-Control 
Block.  


Version 10.4

11 December 2006

--Changed the nature of input for the time-series table giving the 
structure capacity fraction as a function of time.  This is specified
in NC(7).  A time-series table id (includes a table number as a special
case) must be given with a minus sign prefixed to it.  This makes that
input option consistent with, for example, Code 5, Type 7.  A positive 
integer in this field is taken to be a Operation Control Block number
for setting the capacity fraction.  

An additional input is defined at NC(9), giving the name for the 
control structure so that output on the capacity fraction and flow 
state can be appear in the Special Output Block.  

A simple example of a valid instruction is:

  5 6 F8983  F1  F1   Seawall_S_boxes Seawall_S_boxes  1  * gate ;  TAB

where "gate" gives the name of the structure for reference in the 
Special Output Block.  Notice that a place holder, the asterisk, is 
required because there is an input value that exists between NC(7) and 
NC(9), that is, NC(8), which we wish to skip and therefore to take its 
default value of blank.  


Version 10.42

19 December 2006

--Added output of a version/run date-time string to the *.spi file for 
special output.  This is a comment and any program reading this file 
must be able to process comment lines as defined for feq/fequtl.  This 
information will permit tracing the parentage of files produced by 
FEQ.  

--Added to the header for point-time series files that record the FEQ 
version number, the version date, and the date/time of the run that 
created the file.  

--Added output of the version/run date-time information from input point
time-series files. 

--FEQUTL has also been modified so that each function-table file 
created by it will have two echoing comment lines that record that the 
file was created by FEQUTL and also giving the version, the version 
date, and the date and time of the run.  These values will appear in 
the output from FEQ.  It is also possible to put echoing comment lines 
at some point in every *.mtb file so that the name of the creator, or 
modifier, plus dates can be list as well.  This will make it possible 
for the master output file to document details such as the sources of 
information for each file that is used in the input. 

--Found that HI_IQ_NS_NUMGT was not being output to the master
output file.  Added it.

Version 10.43

22 January 2007

--Changed precision of the start and end JTIME values in the 
special-output information file and the special output file to 7 
decimals.  Thus the resolution of the output is now 5x10^-8 day or so.  

Version 10.45

8 March 2007

--Added additional checking of the Network-Matrix input to catch free 
nodes that are unattached.  The problem often arises with nodes on a 
dummy branch, when the user forgets to add the dummy branch, which 
results in the message that the number of nodes is odd.  It could be 
true that the number of exterior nodes is even but they are not 
properly related.  Therefore, the check is done before the check for 
the number of exterior nodes being even.  Hopefully this will make 
finding these model input errors easier.  


Version 10.46

29 March 2007

--Correct an error in handling the transition from zero flow to 
non-zero flow in a structure using a table of type 14.  There were 
conditions in which the flow would have the wrong sign in the 
structure and the computations would fail when the time step was 
automatically reduced below the minimum time step. In testing, 
this correction has increased robustness of models in which a table of 
type 14 is used to represent flows that rise from zero or fall to zero.  

Version 10.47

7 June 2007

--Refined the detention-storage option from the linear iteration to 
Newton's method for solution.  There are cases of time step and flow 
versus storage variation for which linear iteration will not converge 
even though its starting value is close to the root.  Newton's method 
is not subject to that limitation and converges more quickly as well.  
Because Newton's method is much more efficient, the convergence 
tolerance was reduced by a factor of 100 and changes were made so 
that every correction from Newton's method was reflected in the 
final results.  

These changes reduced the tributary-area relative-balance value from 
the range of 10^-4 to 10^-7 in the test case used.  Therefore, 
small changes in output from models run with earlier versions may 
occur.  These changes are a correction of the results with added 
solution robustness should a truly extreme runoff event be simulated.  
Also the chance of non-convergence in solving for the outflow from a 
detention reservoir has been reduced to essentially zero.  

Version 10.50

25 October 2007

-- FEQ now has the option to output an index for all the function 
tables used in a given run.  This is requested by adding

MAKE_TAB_INDEX=YES

to the Run-Control Block.  FEQ will then create a file named, 
ftab_index containing the alpha list of tables by tabid together with 
the table type and the fully qualified file name where the table was 
found.  Currently the file name is built in but you can always add an 
extension to the output file name on the commandline that invokes FEQ, 
and that extension will be appended to the ftab_index.  For example

feq feqin  out.new

will result in the table index being stored in: ftab_index.new.

Note that the alpha list depends on case.  The all lowercase names
appear after those that begin with an upper case letter.


--Add handling of the new values used to track datums, unit systems, 
and the basis for function tables.  Optional information in the header 
block of function tables is now processed and in some cases checked.  
The information items are: (All are max 8-char long descriptions) 

HGRID --name for the horizontal grid being used for easting
         and northings.  For example, SPCS83, for the state-plane 
         coordinate system defined in 1983 using the NAD83.

ZONE -- the zone designation for the horizontal grid, for example: 
        4601 for the north zone in the state of Washington

VDATUM-- The vertical datum such as: NAVD88, NGVD29, NA, ...

UNITSYS -- unit system:  ENGLISH, METRIC, NA, ...

BASIS --  Describe the era, date, our other item that denotes
          the principal  source of the data in the function table. 

The following are floating point numbers:

EASTING -- the easting or x value for the coordinate system

NORTHING -- the northing or the y value for the coordinate system.

Here is an example from a cross-section table:

TABID= RDXSEW_S.93
TYPE=  -25
ZONE=4601     HGRID=SPCS83   VDATUM=NAVD88   UNITSYS=ENGLISH  BASIS=Pre_05  
STATION= 3.63734E+01 GISID=RDXSEW_S.93      EASTING=    1310129.680 NORTHING=     662863.810
ELEVATION= 2.11226E+02                  EXT=-99.900000 FAC=1.000 SLOT=    0.0000


Below is an example for a two-dimensional table generated by the CHANRAT command:

TABID= RDXSZZ_ML
TYPE=  -13 HDATUM=    91.370  CHANRAT zrhufd=    0.0000
ZONE=4601     HGRID=SPCS83   VDATUM=NAVD88   UNITSYS=ENGLISH  BASIS=Pre_05  
EASTING=    1275853.412 NORTHING=     702952.255
LABEL=Flow from MM at RDXSZZ_M.93 to L1                 
NHUP=   31
NPFD=    7


New values have been added to the Run-Control Block to specify the desired 
values for these new items in the header block of function tables.  
Below is an example from a current model:

G_ZONE= 4601
G_HGRID= SPCS83
G_VDATUM= NAVD88
G_UNITSYS= ENGLISH
G_BASIS= Pre_05

Note that all of these must be given,if any are. Note that the values 
given are prescriptive with respect to vertical datum and unit system, 
that is, the vertical datum and unit system for all function tables for 
which these values have a meaning, MUST agree with those values given 
in the Run-Control Block.  There are cases of function tables for which 
the vertical datum or the unit system may not apply.  The special value 
"NA" is then used to indicate "not applicable".  As an example, a user 
can specify an adjustment factor as a function of time for a flow at 
a boundary.  Below is an example of such a table: 

TABID= Dogleg_out_fac
TYPE=  -7
ZONE=4601     HGRID=SPCS83   VDATUM=NA       UNITSYS=NA       BASIS=Pre_05  
EASTING=          -33d6 NORTHING=          -33d6
REFL=0.0        FAC=1.0
YEAR MN DY      HOUR  Flow FAC    Adj of Sott Creek connection to Nksk
1990 01 01       0.0     1.50
3205 12 31      24.0     1.50
2001 12 30


In this case the table has a location.  Therefore zone, hgrid, easting 
and northing are meaningful.  However, there is no need of a vertical 
datum because no elevations are involved.  Furthermore the function 
value has no units so the unit system is not involved.  Also note the 
special values for easting and northing, -33d6.  This denotes that the 
location of the function table has not been given yet.  The user 
should be aware that meters, US survey feet, and international feet 
are used in the State Plane Coordinate System.  The US survey foot 
differs from the international foot by about 2 parts out of a million.  
The international foot is exactly 0.3048 meter and the US survey foot 
is 1200/3937 meter.  To further add to possible confusion, the 
official unit for some states is the meter but surveys are still done 
in feet-- international feet or perhaps survey feet.  For precise work 
the difference becomes important but for most application of FEQ the 
difference between survey feet and international feet is too small to 
matter.  It may be that the units for elevation may differ from the 
units for horizontal location.  Therefore, FEQ assumes that the units 
for horizontal location are implicit in the zone/hgrid specification.  
In practice this may be specific to a given model and may not agree 
with what others in the same zone do--set a standard and use it 
uniformily for a given model.   

Here is another example of a header for a function table:

TABID=weirc
TYPE=   -2
ZONE=4601     HGRID=SPCS83   VDATUM=NA       UNITSYS=ENGLISH  BASIS=Pre_05  
EASTING=          -33d6 NORTHING=          -33d6
REFL=       0.0 FAC=       1.0
      Head    WeirC-
    0.0         3.0
  200.0         3.0
 -1.0


In this case the units for head are feet but they are relative to the 
datum for head and not the datum for elevation.  Consequently the 
vertical datum is not applicable but the unit system is.  Again the 
location of the table may be meaningful but has not been given.  Note 
that 33d6 in feet is larger than any plane coordinate likely to be 
found.  Furthermore, many plane coordinate systems are devised so that 
no valid coordinate is ever < 0.  Consequently the selection of -33d6 
as the indicator of an unknown location.  

FEQ prints a summary of the status of each function table in a given 
run if MAKE_TAB_INDEX=YES exists in the Run-Control Block and if 
G_ZONE has a value other than the default value of "NONE".  This 
summary is printed in the master output file and is headed by a line: 
"List of Function-table status found in FEQ".  As the table is 
constructed, FEQ also supplies the easting and northing for any table 
lacking those values and for which FEQ is able to deduce a reasonable 
value. The updated values of easting and northing are shown with a 
trailing 'u' to denote having been updated.   

--FEQ is able to apply a constant shift value to output elevations to 
have the output relative to a vertical datum that differs from the 
datum used in the computations.  This shift value is given as 

DZ_FOR_OUTPUT=-3.926

in the Run-Control Block.  In this example a shift is made between 
computations based on NAVD88 to results in NGVD29 for the model of the 
Nooksack River in northwest Washington.  A constant shift is within 
about 0.05 feet at every point in the area modeled.  By default the 
shift is 0.0.  

With the exception of DZ_FOR_OUTPUT, FEQ does not make any conversions 
between datums.  Such conversions can be very complex and software is 
generally available to make those conversions to full precision using 
methods developed by the NGS and others.  From the point of view of 
FEQ/FEQUTL, these values are descriptive and under user control.  
Currently only the vertical datum and the unit system are checked for 
consistency.  


Version 10.51

30 November 2007

--Many minor fixes to all of the changes required for the support of 
explicit vertical datum. 

--Added message for code 4 type 3 when the slope is taken from the 
previous time step's results and the slope goes zero or negative.  
Computations must stop at that point. 

Version 10.52

27 February 2008

--Increased the number of PTSF's for output to 1200.  This is no 
longer limited to counting the number of files, but instead, it counts 
the number of output locations involved.  Using the ADD, SUB, OUT, 
OUTA, and QUAD options can often involve far more than 120 locations 
from which flows are taken.  The new limit is based on 10 locations 
per output and 120 output locations.  

Version 10.53

3 September 2008

--Corrected errors in the code that checks for the status of the 
vertical datum and unit system for each function table in a run.  
There were cases of reporting of false errors as well as cases in 
which errors could slip by without being reported.  


Version 10.60

6 October 2008

--Added output of the Subversion version number and URL for the 
source code files.  This defines the files that created the 
executable file that produced the output. 

--Added output of the Subversion version number for the global and 
local home names.  If no home names are used or the working files 
are not under Subversion, nothing is printed. 

--Information on the versions is also placed in other output files:
special output, point time-series files, and the files for Genscn. 
This will help in tracing what the state of the working files for 
each output file. 

Version 10.61

15 October 2008

--At some point between version 10.35 and 10.60, the treatment of 
REFL in tables of types 2, 3, 4, 7, 8, and 9, was changed.  Prior
to this change, this value was not used by FEQ or FEQUTL.  This 
variable has two possible roles:  (1) it could be a shift to be 
applied to all values of the function, or (2) it could be a reference 
level that would be used by the software at some point, like a 
reference level for head.  NOTE: Currently no use is made of a 
reference level for head.  If the value is a shift value, prefix it 
with a lower case letter 's', otherwise prefix it with an 'h', or 
just leave it 0.0 if nothing is to be used.  

The default treatment for non-zero values for REFL not having either 
a 's' or a 'h'prefix proved to be flawed.  It proves to be the case 
that many users of the model have placed non-zero values in this 
field either as a reminder to themselves of some reference level, or 
in error, thinking that FEQ/FEQUTL requires a non-zero value.  The 
default treatment had a bug in it so that the function value was 
shifted if REFL was non-zero. 

The default behavior is to treat a non-zero value without any 
prefixing letter as if it had a prefix of 'h'.  This means that 
the value is stored in the function table for future reference, 
but that the function values are unaffected.  A warning message 
is printed for every table found with a non-zero REFL and no 
prefixing letter.  

The output for these tables was also changed to reflect how the 
REFL is treated.  

-------------------------------------
DESCRIPTION OF CHANGES MADE TO FEQUTL
-------------------------------------

Version 5.48

22 April 2003

---Small depths on the order of roundoff error appeared in cross 
sections having more than one minimum point.  These small depths 
caused subsequent problems in computation.  These have been removed.  
The current tolerance is set at NRZERO/16.0.  The typical default 
value for the near-zero depth value in U. S. units is 0.08 feet.  
Thus, depths less than 0.005 feet will be ignored in computing the 
table.  One side effect of this change is that FEQ/FEQUTL will 
sometimes issue a warning that it has found a discrepancey in area or 
first moment of area greater than the 0.02 tolerance at the initial 
positive depth in the table.  This message can be ignored since the 
absolute value of that error is quite small.  The other option is to 
modify the cross section so that duplicate equal inverts do not occur.  
A shift on the order of 0.1 foot in one invert should eliminate 
the warning message when the cross-section function table is processed.  

--A new bottom-slot shape is available.  This bottom slot has a top 
width that varies exponentially from a given base cross section such 
that the hydraulic depth is constant, that is A(y)/T(y) = Ao/To for 
all y > yo, where yo=max depth of the base section and To= top-width 
of the base section.  The base section is a triangle.  The new command 
is SETSLOTE and with the default settings the input values can be left 
the same.  However, the role of NSLOT can be expanded by adding a sign
to the value.  

 NSLOT > 0.0 -- use NSLOT as the value of Manning's n for the slot 
                boundary
 NSLOT < 0.0 -- compute the average of the Manning's n at the two 
                insertion points on the boundary and multiply this 
                average by the absolute value of NSLOT.  

The command SETSLOTE has the following additional options.  They 
should follow YSLOT/ESLOT in the order given here.  A parameter may 
be omitted but the order of those that remain must be maintained.  

RDEPTH - factor on slot depth to define yo, that is, let ym= max depth 
         of the slot, then yo=RDEPTH*ym.  The default value of RDEPTH 
         is 0.37937619 and the default value of To is 
         WSLOT*RDEPTH/10.0.  If these two defaults are used then the 
         maximum width of the bottom slot will be WSLOT and the area 
         of the slot will be nearly RDEPTH of the area of a triangular 
         slot with the same max depth and with WSLOT as its maximum 
         width. Thus, shifting to using SETSLOTE from SETSLOT with 
         no change in the parameters yields the same maximum width 
         but with a reduced area of flow.  Increasing WSLOT from 1.0 
         to 1/0.37...=2.6359 yields an exponential slot with a maximum 
         top width of 2.6359 and an area equivalent to the area of the 
         triangular slot with top width 1.0 and the same maximum depth. 

TZERO -  Value for the top width of the base section.  

EXPFAC - factor on the exponent in the topwidth for the exponential 
         channel. Default value= 1.0.
               
Changes to RDEPTH must be done carefully because small changes can 
yield large changes in the exponential channel.  For example using 
RDEPTH = 0.30 instead of the default yields a maximum topwidth of 
3.19 instead of 1.0 as given by WSLOT when YSLOT=37.  

The top-width function for the exponential slot is 

T(y) = To*exp[ 2.*EXPFAC*(y/yo - 1)]

to aid in sorting out the effect of non-default settings. 

In limited experiments to date the exponential bottom slot seems to be 
beneficial.  It also appears that a value of NSLOT of about -0.8, 
yielding a bottom slot only a bit less rough than the cross section, 
is also beneficial.  However, these observations are based on only 
one large model.  

--The NRZERO depth value is NOT added to cross sections with a bottom 
slot.  This was forced by the addition of the exponential bottom slot 
wherein the area computed to single precision at the NRZERO depth was 
0.0.   The purpose of the NRZERO point was to improve 
interpolation for the square root of conveyance, and cross sections 
with a bottom slot already have many points that avoid the problem.  

--Six new cross section tables have been added.  These are types 30 
through 35, and they mimic 20 through 25 with the addition of 
derivatives to yield at least piecewise cubic Hermite polynomial 
interpolation for the square root of conveyance, beta, alpha, and the 
two curvilinear axis correction coefficients.  Only the derivatives 
required by the contents of the table are added.  

These tables have been added to yield functional representations that 
are smoother in the sense of having continuity of the first derivative 
and sometimes the second derivative at the tabulated depth values 
(breakpoints).  It may be that some of the computational problems in 
an unsteady-flow model originate at the discontinuities in first 
derivative at breakpoints.  A review of the convergence theorems for 
Newton's method shows that they all depend on continuity of the first 
derivative near the root.  If one of the roots is close to a 
breakpoint, a likely occurrence with a few thousand cross-section 
function tables and each table with 30-100 breakpoints, then the model 
may have convergence difficulty.

The increased order of interpolation may yield more accurate values 
of conveyance, for example, but it is not clear that the change is of 
any significance.  None of the effort in including increased 
smoothness in approximations was motivated by increased accuracy.  
It was done to increase the robustness of the computations.

As a side effect of these new cross-section table types, FEQUTL will 
print out the derivatives outlined above in its output display.  
These derivatives are computed by fitting a cubic spline to the 
tabulated function values and limiting the first derivative at the 
breakpoints of this spline to be such that the variation of the 
function is monotone.  The monotone variation is forced to prevent 
adding potentially spurious maxima or minima between breakpoints.  In 
the printout, each derivative changed to attain monotone variation is 
denoted by a following caret, ^, symbol.  If no caret symbol appears 
for any derivative of an element, then we have continuous first and 
second derivatives.  At any breakpoint having a caret the second 
derivative will be discontinuous.  
 
The tabulated values of the first derivative of the square root of 
conveyance (dkh/dy) are useful for checking what happens with 
non-default values of the parameters for an exponential bottom slot.  

With the new commands the sequence of commands in the header block for 
the master-input file for FEQUTL should be modified to the following:


NCMD=      38    5
FEQX        1
FLOODWAY    2
BRIDGE      3
CULVERT     4
FINISH      5
SAME        6
FEQXLST     8              
ROADFLOW    9
SEWER      10
MULPIPES   11
FTABIN     12
EMBANKQ    13
JUMP       14
CRITQ      15
GRITTER    16
MULCON     18
CHANRAT    19
EXPCON     20
HEC2X      21
QCLIMIT    22
XSINTERP   23
FEQXEXT    25
CHANNEL    26
WSPROX     27
WSPROQZ    28
WSPROT14   29
UFGATE     30
RISERCLV   31                                                                
ORIFICE    32
AXIALPMP   33
PUMPLOSS   34
SETSLOT    35
CLRSLOT    36
MKEMBANK   39
MKWSPRO    40
wsprot14   41
LPRFIT     42
SETSLOTE   44


Please note that without the addition of SETSLOTE to the header 
block, FEQUTL will treat the command as unknown even if the executable 
supports the command.  

--Added additional warning to CULVERT under certain conditions 
involving types 0, 1, and 2 flow.  These conditions may occur when 
the type 0 flow occurs and the approach section is still restrictive 
as the flows approach what CULVERT thinks is a type 1 condition.  Any 
type 0 flow indicates potential problems because having a control at 
section 1 is non-standard and if this control persists to higher 
heads, expect computational failure.  See the notes on error 683 in 
the FEQUTL documentation on what might need to be done.  

--The format for the cross-section function tables has been changed 
to increase precision.  Various cross-section function-table lookup 
routines also have been changed.

--To support conversion of type 13 tables to type 43, a value of the 
free drop at zero upstream head will appear in tables of type 13.  
This is non-zero only for CHANRAT and then only if there is a 
sustaining slope to the plane.  In other cases the free drop at 
zero upstream head should be zero.  It proves useful to have a non-
zero value for free drop at zero head for CHANRAT to reduce the 
rate of change of slope near zero flow.

--Increased precision of elevation output in WSPROQZ.


Version 5.50

1 December 2003

--In testing a new compiler, several missing commas were found in 
format statements.  Apparently, previous compilers processed these 
statements correctly or these formats have never been accessed.  


Version 5.60

8 June 2004

--Added a global-home name to the header info so that projects may be 
shifted from drive to drive or between MS Windows and various 
Linux/Unix systems.  In order to make this convenient, a command-line 
option was also added to specify a configuration file that contains 
the header info.  Thus the same header info can be used for all 
master-input files to FEQUTL.  Consequently, only one file needs to 
be changed to shift to a new location if the global home name and the 
file references in the FEQUTL input are carefully designed.  

Any file name that begins with a / or \ is taken relative to any home 
name that is active.  The only local home name that now exists in 
FEQUTL is in the FTABIN block.  If no home name is given there, then 
any global home name applies.  Otherwise the local home name will 
apply.  If the file name does not start with a / or \ then it is 
taken to be in the directory of invocation of the command.  

The global home name is given as:

GHOME=e:\

where GHOME must start in column 1 and must be the last item in the 
header block.

If a configuration file is given on the command line, then the header 
info in the master-input file is skipped.  This information can be 
removed if a configuration file is supplied.  FEQUTL now also reports 
the names of the master-input file, master-output file, function-
table file, and the source of the configuration data in the master-
output file. Also, FEQUTL will write the source of the configuration 
file to the console. This information should help keep clear what 
information FEQUTL used. 

The user may wish to modifiy the batch/script file that
invokes fequtl.  An example script line for Linux/Unix is 

/pj/usf/fequtl/gnulnx/lf95/fequtl95 $1 $2 $3  -conf /pj/usf/fequtl/test/fequtl.conf

An example line for a MS Windows batch file is

f:\usf\fequtl\msw\lf95\fequtl #1 #2 #3  -conf f:\usf\fequtl\test\fequtl.conf

The feature of command-line completion also works in this case, 
that is, one can type as a valid command:

fequtl fequtl.exm

and the master-output file will be fequtl.out and the function-table 
file will be fequtl.tab.  The configuration file is found in this case. 

Please note that there must be at least one space between -conf and 
the first character of the configuration file-name specification. 

--Changed input of TABID and TYPE and control parameters for CHANRAT 
to named-item input.  Two lines can be taken for this input to match 
what was used in the fixed format.  However, it is possible to place 
all of these items on a single line. 

Examples:

1.0 The old fixed form will still work so long as no changes to 
default values are made:

CHANRAT
TABID=  600  
TYPE=   13 
LABEL=TEST OF CHANRAT-using auto arguments
XSTAB= 100
BOTSLP=0.003
LENGTH=000000030. MIDELEV= TAB
HEAD SEQUENCE FOR TABLE
NFRAC= 60
POWER= 1.5
LIPREC= 0.02
MINPFD= 0.1
0.25
10.0
-1.0

A new variable to control the table has been added, the target minimum 
flow, MINQ.  This is given as one of the options.  The other optional 
inputs, ERRKND, INTHOW, EPSINT, NDDABS, and NDDREL, are rarely needed, 
but if given, must follow the named-item pattern.  For example, to 
change the integration convergence tolerance from the default of 0.1 
to 0.2 and to set the target minimum flow to 1.5, one could use: 

CHANRAT
TABID=  600  TYPE=   13  MINQ= 1.5  EPSINT=0.20
LABEL=TEST OF CHANRAT-using auto arguments
XSTAB= 100
BOTSLP=0.003
LENGTH=000000030. MIDELEV= TAB
HEAD SEQUENCE FOR TABLE
NFRAC= 60
POWER= 1.5
LIPREC= 0.02
MINPFD= 0.1
0.25
10.0
-1.0

With this option added to the input, if desired, there is better 
control over MINQ.  In prior versions, the only way to set MINQ 
for CHANRAT was through the global value given in the header block 
and now in the configuration file.  This sometimes proved messy 
because not all structures in a single master-input file require 
the same target minimum flow.  In most cases a single value will 
work, but there were some exceptions that required isolating the 
structure or structures to their own master-input file.  


Version 5.61

29 June 2004

--Added detection of the operating system to FEQUTL so that the proper 
name divider could be placed in file names.  This was included so that
inputs can be transferred between MS Windows and Linux/Unix without 
having to change them.  


Version 5.65

25 August 2004

--Changed length of files names for all but command line arguments to 
be 128 characters.  

--In the process of doing extensive checking of the file-name-length 
changes, global checking was enabled in the compiler.  This checks 
many things including un-initialized variables.  Several such 
variables appeared and have been fixed.  The following is a synopsis 
of what was changed.  

1.  Sinuosity values were not being set properly for SEWER, MULPIPES, 
and MULCON.  However, that had no effect because even though these 
values were being moved around they were not used in the computations.  
FEQUTL always disables sinuosity corrections in closed conduits.  
However, the variables involved were initialized to prevent problems 
during further such checks.  

2.  A bug was found in setting the line-segment Manning's n values in 
MULCON.  One or two line segments could get a Manning's n at one 
point, that is for one line segment, that came from an adjacent 
conduit.  Thus, if the conduits in the system had differing Manning's 
n, the near flowing full values of conveyance would be affected.  In 
one test case the changes in conveyance were about 0.4 percent when 
flowing full.  However, this was a test case in which the conduit 
diameters varied by more than a factor of two.  Normally this would 
not be the case.  

3.  The CULVERT command had two cases of un-initialized variables.  One 
involved using a type 1 value when type 1 flow was not possible.  When 
corrected, the same results were obtained for the flows in the culvert.  
However, there might have been some cases where this was not true.  

The other involved a type 5 flow submergence-limit computation and the 
starting value for an iterative solution was not set.  However, 
after setting it to a proper value, the same results were obtained 
as before.  


Version 5.66

8 June 2005

--A bug was detected in an area increment by the output routine in 
FEQUTL.  The problem was eventually traced to the routine that removes 
duplicate elevations and near duplicate elevations from the list of 
breakpoints in top-width variation for a cross section.  Detection of 
near duplicates was not properly scaled when the elevations were in 
the range of 700's or more.  Thus, one or more breakpoints at the end 
of boundary line segments that deviated only slightly from horizontal 
were deleted from the list.  This would then skip a breakpoint that 
should have been included in the table.  The top widths and areas 
given in the final table were correct, but some increments in area and 
related elements were incorrect because a breakpoint was improperly 
left out.  

The scaling has been changed to detect cases of near duplication when 
the elevations are large.  However, there may still be cases were the 
increments in area or first moment of area will fail the test in the 
output routine.  FEQUTL will stop at this point.  To get FEQUTL to 
compute the table, scan the cross section for nearly horizontal line 
segments and increase the deviation from horizontal for any found.  
The tolerance for near duplicates is determined as follows: 

1. Compute the average of the maximum and minimum elevation in the 
table. 

2.  Subtract the minimum elevation from the average in 1. to yield 
an "average" depth for the table. 

3.  For each adjacent pair of elevations in the list of breakpoint 
elevations, compute the difference in elevation and divide by the 
average depth computed in 2.  This gives the relative difference in 
depth for that interval.  

4. If the absolute value of the relative difference in depth is less 
than 1 x 10^-5, then retain only one of the two elevations in the 
breakpoint list.  

Example: If the max elevation is 710 and the min elevation is 705, 
then the average depth is: (710 - 705)/2 - 705 = 2.5.  In order for an 
elevation breakpoint to be included in the final list, its elevation 
must deviate by more than 2.5 x 1 x 10^-5 = 2.5 x 10^-5.  If the line 
segment ending at a deleted elevation breakpoint is long, then the 
loss of area might be large enough to be noticed.  In this example, a 
line segment 1000 feet long would yield an error of about (1000 x 2.5 
x 10^-5)/2= 0.0125 ft^2.  This is clearly a negligible amount given 
the size of the cross section.  


Version 5.67

25 October 2005

--Changes to FEQ required some changes to the storage of 1-D tables
of types 2, 3, and 4.  


Version 5.68

26 October 2006

--Found that GISID was not initialized to blank in subroutines MULCON, 
PIPES, and SEWER.  Currently, FEQUTL does not input a value for GISID 
for these sections.  Therefore, GISID was set to blank in these 
subroutines.  In subroutine TABOUT, a blank value of GISID is then set 
to the table id for output.  


Version 5.70

16 December 2006

--Added output of a version/run date-time string to all of the 
function-table files.  The lines were added as comments so FEQ or 
FEQUTL will skip those lines when reading the files.  These items of 
information will prove useful in tracing the parentage of various 
files, especially if multiple copies of files of the same name exist 
in different directories or in a version control system.  


Version 5.71

30 March 2007

--Modified wsprot14 to check for changes in tailwater elevation made 
by WSPRO when the flow state at the exit section is deemed to be super 
critical.  In that case, WSPRO computes the critical depth for the 
given flow, and goes on.  What we want is to reduce the flow until the 
flow state is subcritical at the given water-surface elevation.  
FEQUTL will NOT output a type 14 table if it finds that any of the 
tailwater elevations have been changed.  An error message is issued 
for each one found.  The flows have to be reduced until WSPRO finds 
the flow in a subcritical state at the exit section.


Version 5.75 

29 October 2007

--Added support for attaching a description to each function table 
that documents the following information about the table: 

1.  Define the horizontal datum of any eastings/northings included in 
the table.  These will appear in some tables, depending on the data 
available for their computation.  Easting and northing fields have 
been added to all tables.  Until this version, the only tables that 
had such options were cross-section function tables.  The horizontal 
datum is described using two eight-character fields: ZONE and HGRID.  
The values supplied for these fields are user defined.  However, once 
selected, the values must be used with complete consistency for all 
tables in a model.  

2.  Define the vertical datum of the elevations that may be in the 
table.  This is defined by an eight-character field labeled: VDATUM.  
Again the contents of this field are user defined.  

3.  The system of units used in the table.  This field is labeled 
with: UNITSYS and again its contents are user defined.  It also has a 
maximum of eight characaters.  

4.  The basis or source or era of the data in the table.  This field 
is labelled as: BASIS and is eight-characters in length and is again 
user defined.  

The reason for adding these labels is that the United States is 
undergoing a shift in datum, both for horizontal and vertical 
measurements.  The new datums are already in use, for example, recent 
maps from the USGS already make use of them.  Some GIS databases 
already make use of them.  However, the transition from the older 
datums to the newer datums will take place over a protrated period of 
time and will probably be done model by model.  Thus it is possible 
that both sets of datums will be in use by one organization and 
therefore it becomes helpful to have explicit labels attached to 
function tables to help avoid extra confusion in this process.  

Here are some examples of using these values in FEQUTL.  Only the 
relevant parts of the input are shown to avoid a huge number of lines.

Example using FEQXEXT with the input generated by a utility program
that used 3-D sections extracted from a DTM.

FEQXEXT
TABID=RDXSBJ_S.93      NOOUT MONOTONE EXTEND NEWBETAM
GISID=RDXSBJ_S.93
STATION=   28.5293
ZONE=4601 HGRID=SPCS83 VDATUM=NAVD88 UNITSYS=ENGLISH BASIS=Pre_05
SHIFT=3.926
EASTING=  1284704.08 NORTHING=   683186.55
VARN=NCON
NSUB   41  0.086  0.086  0.086  0.086  0.086  0.086  0.086  0.086  0.086  0.086
           0.086  0.086  0.086  0.086  0.086  0.086  0.086  0.086  0.086  0.085
           0.074  0.074  0.074  0.074  0.074  0.074  0.074  0.074  0.074  0.074
           0.074  0.074  0.074  0.074  0.068  0.057  0.057  0.057  0.057  0.057
           0.057
    OFFSET ELEVATION SUBS    N0

The new items are named-item format.  Therefore each name and its 
value must appear on the same line but the order and the placement is 
user defined. That is, the input above could be entered as:

FEQXEXT
TABID=RDXSBJ_S.93      NOOUT MONOTONE EXTEND NEWBETAM
GISID=RDXSBJ_S.93
STATION=   28.5293
EASTING=  1284704.08 NORTHING=   683186.55
ZONE=4601 
HGRID=SPCS83 VDATUM=NAVD88 
UNITSYS=ENGLISH BASIS=Pre_05
SHIFT=3.926
VARN=NCON
NSUB   41  0.086  0.086  0.086  0.086  0.086  0.086  0.086  0.086  0.086  0.086
           0.086  0.086  0.086  0.086  0.086  0.086  0.086  0.086  0.086  0.085
           0.074  0.074  0.074  0.074  0.074  0.074  0.074  0.074  0.074  0.074
           0.074  0.074  0.074  0.074  0.068  0.057  0.057  0.057  0.057  0.057
           0.057
    OFFSET ELEVATION SUBS    N0

and still obtain the same result.  Lines below and including NSUB must 
appear as shown however. 

The output from either one of these inputs yields:

TABID= RDXSBJ_S.93
TYPE=  -25
ZONE=4601     HGRID=SPCS83   VDATUM=NAVD88   UNITSYS=ENGLISH  BASIS=Pre_05  
STATION= 2.85293E+01 GISID=RDXSBJ_S.93      EASTING=    1284704.080 NORTHING=     683186.550
ELEVATION= 1.17356E+02                  EXT=-99.900000 FAC=1.000 SLOT=    0.0000
     Depth Top_width         Area   Sqrt(Conv)      Beta First_moment     Alpha        Critq        Ma        Mq


Notice that the new labels are just echoed to the output.  However, 
in the function table itself, the format is fixed, that is each label 
must appear exactly in the position shown.  The items are not named-
item.  Most often these tables are created by a computer program and 
are read by a computer program, so the fixed formats do not cause 
major problems.  However, if the function table is modified manually, 
one must exercise care that the fixed format is followed.

Here is an example of a CHANRAT command, again generated from a 
utility program that uses 3-D sections and this program extracts an 
appropriate easting and northing:

CHANRAT
TABID=RDEGEF_M.1R
TYPE= 13
ZONE=4601     HGRID=SPCS83   VDATUM=NAVD88   UNITSYS=ENGLISH  BASIS=Pre_05  
EASTING=    1304906.856 NORTHING=     667997.465
LABEL=Flow fromMM at RDEGEF_M.1 to R1                   
XSTAB=RDEGEF_M.1R_XS  
BOTSLP=        0.
LENGTH=    50.0   MIDELEV=       TAB
HEAD SEQUENCE FOR TABLE
NFRAC= 60 
POWER= 1.5
LIPREC= 0.010
MINPFD= 0.10
0.25
20.0
-1.

The output from this input fragment looks like this:

TABID= RDEGEF_M.1R
TYPE=  -13 HDATUM=   201.900  CHANRAT zrhufd=    0.0000
ZONE=4601     HGRID=SPCS83   VDATUM=NAVD88   UNITSYS=ENGLISH  BASIS=Pre_05  
EASTING=    1304906.856 NORTHING=     667997.465
LABEL=Flow fromMM at RDEGEF_M.1 to R1                   
NHUP=   35
NPFD=    7
HUP     2605-4 2957-4 3363-4 3747-4 4081-4 4465-4 4932-4 5462-4 6092-4 6616-4
FDROP   1376-4 1538-4 1725-4 1898-4 2021-4 2141-4 2270-4 2408-4 2569-4 2715-4


All the fields are fixed format.

FEQUTL does not make any conversions between datums.  Such conversions 
can be very complex and software is generally available to make those 
conversions to full precision using methods developed by the NGS and 
others.  From the point of view of FEQ/FEQUTL, these values are 
descriptive and under user control.  Currently, only the vertical 
datum and the unit system are checked for consistency.  

Working with varying datums can become confusing and even a simple 
typing error in one of the new fields could result in FEQ complaining 
because it has found an inconsistent vertical datum or unit system 
(the only two values now checked by FEQ).  Consequently, new global 
values for these new items of information have been put into the 
FEQUTL configuration file (See this file under version 5.60 to get an 
overview of the configuration file.  It is just the header information 
placed into a file.) These new values are prescriptive, that is, they 
are used to force all input values to conform.  Thus a typing error 
or just a mistake in the datum given, will be detected by FEQUTL.  

Here is an example configuration file:

UNITS=  ENGLISH  NOMINAL      45.0       0.0
NCMD=      35
FEQX        1
FLOODWAY    2
BRIDGE      3
CULVERT     4
FINISH      5
FEQXLST     8              
SEWER      10
MULPIPES   11
FTABIN     12
EMBANKQ    13
CRITQ      15
GRITTER    16
MULCON     18
CHANRAT    19
EXPCON     20
HEC2X      21
QCLIMIT    22
XSINTERP   23
FEQXEXT    25
CHANNEL    26
WSPROX     27
WSPROQZ    28
WSPROT14   29
UFGATE     30
RISERCLV   31
ORIFICE    32
AXIALPMP   33
PUMPLOSS   34
SETSLOT    35
CLRSLOT    36
MKEMBANK   39
MKWSPRO    40
wsprot14   41
LPRFIT     42
SETSLOTE   44
DZLIM= 2.55
NRZERO= 0.08
USGSBETA=NO
EPSARG=5.E-5
EPSF=     1.E-4 EPSABS= 1.E-4
EXTEND=NO
MINQ= 1.0
GHOME=/pj/software/usf/fequtl/test
G_ZONE = 4601
G_HGRID = SPSC83
G_VDATUM = NAVD88
G_UNITSYS = ENGLISH
G_BASIS = DTM


; Make sure that the config file contains several blank lines at the end



The new values are:

  G_ZONE giving the required zone value for all commands. 
  G_HGRID giving the required horizontal grid for all commands
  G_VDATUM giving the required vertical datum for all commands
  G_UNITSY giving the required unit system for all commands
  G_BASIS giving the required basis for all commands.

All must be given or all must be omitted, and they must be in the 
order shown.  If present, FEQUTL will complain with an error message 
if any command that can have the value is missing a value or has a 
response that differs from the global value (the G prefix stands for 
"global").  Currently, this only applies to the vertical datum and 
the unit system.  However, it may be extended to the other values at 
a later time when more extensive use is made of the easting and 
northing values.  Using the response NA for the vertical datum or the 
unit system will avoid the error message.  

Here is a synopsis of what happens under certain combinations
of input:

1. Global values not present in the configuration file

   No checking for consistency in vertical datum or unit system. 
   Complete freedom for specifying these values for a given function
   table or not specifying these values.  If specified, they will 
   appear in the function table. 

2. Global values present in the configuration file

    Each command that supports the values must have them 
    present or an error message will abort the run.  The 
    vertical datum and the unit system response must match 
    their global value but all others are not checked. 
    The response NA for the vertical datum or the unit system
    will suppress checking that value.  All values will be 
    placed in the computed function table. 


Version 5.76 

5 September 2008

--Fixed problem that NA was not properly recognized as an 
error-suppressing response for the vertical datum and unit system.  

--Fixed problem in HEC2X so that the location items, zone, hgrid, 
vdatum, unitsys, basis, easting and northing, were output to each 
cross section when the user supplied these values in the input.  

Version 5.80

6 October 2008

--Added output of the source code repository and the Subversion 
version number.  This should define the set of files used to create 
the executable file that produced the output.  This also appears in 
the function-table file. 

--Added output of the Subversion version if the global home name or 
a local home name are under it.  Otherwise, nothing should be printed.  
If the home names are not used, nothing is printed.  

23 March 2009

--Found that the selection of variation of Manning's n with depth in 
FEQXEXT was ignored by the code and was being treated as a case of 
constant n.  This mistake first appeared in version 5.75.  It is 
now corrected in this version.  
