Description of Point Time Series File Processing

The following utility reads PTSF's in the old sequential unformatted style
and creates PTSF's in the new direct unformatted style:
File name                    Description
---------                    -----------------------------------------------------------
updatedptsf/updateptsf.exe   Program to convert to the new style for PTSF
updateptsf/infile.upd        Input file containing file names for processing
updateptsf/updateptsf.for    Source code


The input files for the programs contain one or more lines.  Each line 
is a complete instruction giving the name of the source file, the name 
of a target file, and in some cases, the description of the operation 
or format of the source/target file.  There can be no blank lines in 
an input file; not even a blank line at the end!  A blank line will 
send the programs into problems.  


The contents of infile.upd are one or more lines like:

'cumqbase.sim'  'cumqbase.drt' 


with no blank lines before or after.  Each line has two 
character strings.  The first string gives the name of 
a PTSF in the old sequential style and the second string
gives the name of the PTSF in the new direct style.  


Important: Any utility that is reading a PTSF must have 
been compiled by the same compiler that was used to 
compile the version of FEQ that created the file.  This 
is vital.  FEQ reports the compiler used for the executable
near the top of the master-output file since version 9.93. 
If you are using an earlier version then the following points
could help decide which compiler was used just in case you
do not know:

1. If you are using a model from DuPage County, Illinois,
that has PTSF's or DTSF's, then it is most likely the 
compiler used was LF90.  However, file conversion is underway
and this may fail to be true in the future. 

2.Check the size of the executable:  If it is less than
1,500,000 bytes, it is probably compiled with LF90 and 
if it is greater, probably LF95.  May not be reliable with
old versions of FEQ.

To convert a PTSF from the old style to the new style:

1. Decide what compiler created the executable that 
wrote the PTSF. 

2. Download the executable of updateptsf for that 
compiler.  If you have a compiler other than LF90 or LF95
then you will have to compile the source code for updatetsf
with that compiler. 

3. Create the file: infile.upd for all the PTSF's you 
need to convert.  Notice that the name must be changed
so use some standatd extension that will make the file
names differ. 

4.Invoke the executable name as a command with no
arguments.  That is, run the utility!

5. At the prompt give the name:  infile.upd or whatever
name you gave to an equivalent file. Terminate your
input with the enter key. 

With the new style for the PTSF's there will be little 
need for the other utilities with the compilers currently 
being used.  However, some other compiler may produce 
executables of FEQ that write direct unformatted files 
in a manner incompatible with the current compilers.  
Then we will have to use the other files and makeptsf
will need to be modified to write the new format.  



